README.md, before:

# fiboa CLI

A command-line interface (CLI) for working with fiboa.

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Documentation / Commands](#commands)
- [Development](#development)

## Getting Started

In order to make working with fiboa easier we have developed command-line interface (CLI) tools such as 
inspection, validation and file format conversions.

### Installation

You will need to have **Python 3.9** or any later version installed. 

Run `pip install fiboa-cli` in the CLI to install the validator.

**Optional:** To install additional dependencies for specific [converters](#converter-for-existing-datasets),
you can for example run: `pip install fiboa-cli[xyz]` with xyz being the converter name.

**Note on versions:**
- fiboa CLI >= 0.3.0 works with fiboa version > 0.2.0
- fiboa CLI < 0.3.0 works with fiboa version = 0.1.0

### Execute a command

After the installation you should be able to run the following command: `fiboa`

You should see usage instructions and [available commands](#commands) for the CLI.

fiboa CLI supports various commands to work with the files:

- [Inspect fiboa GeoParquet files](#inspect-fiboa-geoparquet-file)
- [Validation fiboa GeoParquet and GeoJSON files](#validation)
- [Convert existing non-fiboa datasets to a fiboa GeoParquet file](#converter-for-existing-datasets)
- File Format Conversion:
  - [Create a fiboa GeoParquet file from GeoJSON files](#create-fiboa-geoparquet-from-geojson)
  - [Create fiboa GeoJSON files from a GeoParquet file](#create-fiboa-geojson-from-geoparquet)
- Extension and Spec development:
  - [Update an extension template with new names](#update-an-extension-template-with-new-names)
  - [Validate a fiboa Schema](#validate-a-fiboa-schema)
  - [Create JSON Schema from fiboa Schema](#create-json-schema-from-fiboa-schema)

## Commands

### Validation

To validate a fiboa GeoParquet or GeoJSON file, you can for example run:

- GeoJSON: `fiboa validate example.json --collection collection.json`
- GeoParquet: `fiboa validate example.parquet --data`

Check `fiboa validate --help` for more details.

The validator also supports remote files.

- `http://` or `https://`: no further configuration is needed.
- `s3://`: `s3fs` needs to be installed (run `pip install .[s3]`) and you may need to set environment variables.
  Refer [here](https://s3fs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#credentials) for how to define credentials.
- `gs://`: `gcsfs` needs to be installed (run `pip install .[gcs]`).
  By default, `gcsfs` will attempt to use your default gcloud credentials or, attempt to get credentials from the google metadata service, or fall back to anonymous access.

### Create fiboa GeoParquet from GeoJSON

To create a fiboa-compliant GeoParquet for a fiboa-compliant set of GeoJSON files containing Features or FeatureCollections,
you can for example run:

- `fiboa create-geoparquet geojson/example.json -o example.parquet -c geojson/collection.json`

Check `fiboa create-geoparquet --help` for more details.

### Create fiboa GeoJSON from GeoParquet

To create one or multiple fiboa-compliant GeoJSON file(s) for a fiboa-compliant GeoParquet file,
you can for example run:

- GeoJSON FeatureCollection:
  `fiboa create-geojson example.parquet -o dest-folder`
- GeoJSON Features (with indentation and max. 100 features):
  `fiboa create-geojson example.parquet -o dest-folder -n 100 -i 2 -f`

Check `fiboa create-geoparquet --help` for more details.

### Inspect fiboa GeoParquet file

To look into a fiboa GeoParquet file to get a rough understanding of the content, the following can be executed:

- `fiboa describe example.parquet`

Check `fiboa describe --help` for more details.

### Create JSON Schema from fiboa Schema

To create a JSON Schema for a fiboa Schema YAML file, you can for example run:

- `fiboa jsonschema example.json --id=https://fiboa.github.io/specification/v0.1.0/geojson/schema.json -o schema.json`

Check `fiboa jsonschema --help` for more details.

### Validate a fiboa Schema

To validate a fiboa Schema YAML file, you can for example run:

- `fiboa validate-schema schema/schema.yaml`

Check `fiboa validate-schema --help` for more details.

### Update an extension template with new names

Once you've created and git cloned a new extension, you can use the CLI
to update all template placeholders with proper names.

For example, if your extension is meant to have
- the title "Timestamps Extension", 
- the prefix `ts` (e.g. field `ts:created` or `ts:updated`),
- is hosted at `https://github.io/fiboa/timestamps-extension`
  (organization: `fiboa`, repository `timestamps-extension`),
- and you run fiboa in the folder of the extension.

Then the following command could be used:
- `fiboa rename-extension . -t Timestamps -p ts -s timestamps-extension -o fiboa`

Check `fiboa rename-extension --help` for more details.

### Converter for existing datasets

To convert an existing dataset to fiboa using the pre-defined converters:

- `fiboa convert de_nrw`

Available converters:
- `at` (Austria)
- `de_bb` (Berlin/Brandenburh, Germany)
- `de_nds` (Lowe Saxony, Germany)
- `de_nrw` (North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany)
- `de_sh` (Schleswig-Holstein, Germany)

See [Implement a converter](#implement-a-converter) for details about how to 

## Development

To install in development mode run `pip install -e .` in this folder.

For the tests first run `pip install -r requirements-dev.txt` to install pytest.
Then you can run `pytest` to execute the tests.

### Implement a converter

The following high-level description gives an idea how to implement a converter in fiboa CLI:

1. Create a new file in `fiboa_cli/datasets` based on the `template.py`
2. Implement the `convert()` function
3. Add missing dependencies into a separate dependency group in `setup.py`
4. Add the converter to the list above
5. Create a PR to submit your converter for review

An in-depth guide how to create a cloud-native fiboa dataset using fiboa CLI is available at:
<https://github.com/fiboa/data/blob/main/HOWTO.md>

Commit message:

`fiboa converters`: More detailed list of available converters/datasets #34

README.md, after:

# fiboa CLI

A command-line interface (CLI) for working with fiboa.

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)
- [Documentation / Commands](#commands)
- [Development](#development)

## Getting Started

In order to make working with fiboa easier we have developed command-line interface (CLI) tools such as 
inspection, validation and file format conversions.

### Installation

You will need to have **Python 3.9** or any later version installed. 

Run `pip install fiboa-cli` in the CLI to install the validator.

**Optional:** To install additional dependencies for specific [converters](#converter-for-existing-datasets),
you can for example run: `pip install fiboa-cli[xyz]` with xyz being the converter name.

**Note on versions:**
- fiboa CLI >= 0.3.0 works with fiboa version > 0.2.0
- fiboa CLI < 0.3.0 works with fiboa version = 0.1.0

### Execute a command

After the installation you should be able to run the following command: `fiboa`

You should see usage instructions and [available commands](#commands) for the CLI.

fiboa CLI supports various commands to work with the files:

- [fiboa CLI](#fiboa-cli)
  - [Getting Started](#getting-started)
    - [Installation](#installation)
    - [Execute a command](#execute-a-command)
  - [Commands](#commands)
    - [Validation](#validation)
    - [Create fiboa GeoParquet from GeoJSON](#create-fiboa-geoparquet-from-geojson)
    - [Create fiboa GeoJSON from GeoParquet](#create-fiboa-geojson-from-geoparquet)
    - [Inspect fiboa GeoParquet file](#inspect-fiboa-geoparquet-file)
    - [Create JSON Schema from fiboa Schema](#create-json-schema-from-fiboa-schema)
    - [Validate a fiboa Schema](#validate-a-fiboa-schema)
    - [Update an extension template with new names](#update-an-extension-template-with-new-names)
    - [Converter for existing datasets](#converter-for-existing-datasets)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [Implement a converter](#implement-a-converter)

## Commands

### Validation

To validate a fiboa GeoParquet or GeoJSON file, you can for example run:

- GeoJSON: `fiboa validate example.json --collection collection.json`
- GeoParquet: `fiboa validate example.parquet --data`

Check `fiboa validate --help` for more details.

The validator also supports remote files.

- `http://` or `https://`: no further configuration is needed.
- `s3://`: `s3fs` needs to be installed (run `pip install .[s3]`) and you may need to set environment variables.
  Refer [here](https://s3fs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/#credentials) for how to define credentials.
- `gs://`: `gcsfs` needs to be installed (run `pip install .[gcs]`).
  By default, `gcsfs` will attempt to use your default gcloud credentials or, attempt to get credentials from the google metadata service, or fall back to anonymous access.

### Create fiboa GeoParquet from GeoJSON

To create a fiboa-compliant GeoParquet for a fiboa-compliant set of GeoJSON files containing Features or FeatureCollections,
you can for example run:

- `fiboa create-geoparquet geojson/example.json -o example.parquet -c geojson/collection.json`

Check `fiboa create-geoparquet --help` for more details.

### Create fiboa GeoJSON from GeoParquet

To create one or multiple fiboa-compliant GeoJSON file(s) for a fiboa-compliant GeoParquet file,
you can for example run:

- GeoJSON FeatureCollection:
  `fiboa create-geojson example.parquet -o dest-folder`
- GeoJSON Features (with indentation and max. 100 features):
  `fiboa create-geojson example.parquet -o dest-folder -n 100 -i 2 -f`

Check `fiboa create-geoparquet --help` for more details.

### Inspect fiboa GeoParquet file

To look into a fiboa GeoParquet file to get a rough understanding of the content, the following can be executed:

- `fiboa describe example.parquet`

Check `fiboa describe --help` for more details.

### Create JSON Schema from fiboa Schema

To create a JSON Schema for a fiboa Schema YAML file, you can for example run:

- `fiboa jsonschema example.json --id=https://fiboa.github.io/specification/v0.1.0/geojson/schema.json -o schema.json`

Check `fiboa jsonschema --help` for more details.

### Validate a fiboa Schema

To validate a fiboa Schema YAML file, you can for example run:

- `fiboa validate-schema schema/schema.yaml`

Check `fiboa validate-schema --help` for more details.

### Update an extension template with new names

Once you've created and git cloned a new extension, you can use the CLI
to update all template placeholders with proper names.

For example, if your extension is meant to have
- the title "Timestamps Extension", 
- the prefix `ts` (e.g. field `ts:created` or `ts:updated`),
- is hosted at `https://github.io/fiboa/timestamps-extension`
  (organization: `fiboa`, repository `timestamps-extension`),
- and you run fiboa in the folder of the extension.

Then the following command could be used:
- `fiboa rename-extension . -t Timestamps -p ts -s timestamps-extension -o fiboa`

Check `fiboa rename-extension --help` for more details.

### Converter for existing datasets

The CLI ships various converters for existing datasets.

To get a list of available converters/datasets with title, license, etc. run:
- `fiboa converters`

Use any of the IDs from the list to convert an existing dataset to fiboa:

- `fiboa convert de_nrw`

See [Implement a converter](#implement-a-converter) for details about how to 

## Development

To install in development mode run `pip install -e .` in this folder.

For the tests first run `pip install -r requirements-dev.txt` to install pytest.
Then you can run `pytest` to execute the tests.

### Implement a converter

The following high-level description gives an idea how to implement a converter in fiboa CLI:

1. Create a new file in `fiboa_cli/datasets` based on the `template.py`
2. Implement the `convert()` function
3. Add missing dependencies into a separate dependency group in `setup.py`
4. Add the converter to the list above
5. Create a PR to submit your converter for review

An in-depth guide how to create a cloud-native fiboa dataset using fiboa CLI is available at:
<https://github.com/fiboa/data/blob/main/HOWTO.md>
